---
layout: post
title: "Insights from my little journey on IIO"
date: 2019-05-01 17:03:00 -0300
categories: linux-kernel-newbie
---

In my time of contribution to IIO, I had some fun and learning situations.
These things probably happen frequently to newcomers, but as common as they
are, you are many times unprepared for them.

### "HTML mail is not permitted on the Linux Kernel Mailing List"

I always send patches using neomutt (again, Siqueira has well-made setup files
for neomutt here:
https://github.com/rodrigosiqueira/myConfigFiles/tree/master/roles/neomutt/files/mutt).
I find the neomutt a cleaner and more efficient mail client to format patches
with all the necessary information. Moreover, it provides a second chance to
revise the code and messages before sending it.
It also helps the developer to comply with email sending etiquette standards.
Yes, it exists and is briefly explained here:
https://kernelnewbies.org/PatchCulture.

Some colleagues have allerted me about the mistake of sending an HTML e-mail to
the mailing list. However,  I'm a beginner and I fell into the trap of
incorporating HTML when replying to an email on the list. This happened was
because I decided to reply to a patch comment using the Gmail website (without
checking the plain text option).
Does checking this option really solve the problem? I don't know. I was so
embarrassed that I preferred not to take any chances and, since then, I only
send emails to the list using neomutt. Honestly, I was afraid to receive some
rude answers about this mistake.

Finally, I resend the email by apologizing. Life goes on :)

### Who is this guy?

In the beginning, I had an idea that Jonathan (maintainer), the author of the
driver and those in cc of my patch-email, are the only ones who could make an
opinion about my patch. So, the first time that an unknown developer criticized
my patch's style, I was wondering: who is this guy and why is he criticizing my
patch?

One of the things I learned in life is to wait. You don't have to be the first
to respond when you're in a group activity, and, some times, you don't need to
answer anything.
I also understand that developing for Linux is always a group activity. The
team is not fixed, you don't know all the participants, but you need to know
that good group activity practices usually work on the Linux community. Also,
remember that you are in public and the audience does not also know you (and
may never know you); so what you write is free of interpretation as well.

Therefore, I waited a while for most experienced developers and any possible
involved in that code to give their opinion too. Finally, I asked my colleagues
at FLUSP, who was that guy and found out that he was a very experienced
developer at one of the main companies that develop devices, in addition to
being very active in the community. So this guy was much more experienced and
capable than I was and he knew exactly what he was doing. Furthermore, he
stopped his time to carefully review my patch (a so simple and not very
relevant patch), from an inexperienced developer. So who am I to find
anything? hahaha

Finally, I believe that not knowing who is the person that is commenting on
your code is (or should be) the standard of developing for an open and
geographically distributed community.




